chapter-installation.asciidoc, before:

[[installation]]
== Installing Maven

This chapter contains very detailed instructions for installing Maven
on a number of different platforms. Instead of assuming a level of
familiarity with installing software and setting environment
variables, we've opted to be as thorough as possible to minimize any
problems that might arise due to a partial installation. The only thing
this chapter assumes is that you've already installed a suitable Java
Development Kit (JDK). If you are just interested in installation, you
can move on to the rest of the book after reading through
<<installation-sect-maven-download>> and
<<installation-sect-maven-install>>. If you are interested in the
details of your Maven installation, this entire chapter will give you
an overview of what you've installed and the meaning of the Apache
Software License, Version 2.0.

[[installation-sect-java]]
=== Verify your Java Installation

While Maven can run on Java 1.6, this book assumes that you are
running at least Java 7. Go with the most recent stable Java
Development Kit (JDK) available for your operating system. Either Java
5 or Java 6 will work with all of the examples in this book.

----
% java -version
java version "1.7.0_71"
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.7.0_71-b14)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 24.71-b01, mixed mode)
----

Maven works with all certified Java^TM^ compatible development kits,
and a few non-certified implementations of Java. The examples in this
book were written and tested against the official Java Development Kit
releases downloaded from the Sun Microsystems web site. If you’re
working with a Linux distribution, you may need to download Sun’s JDK
yourself and make sure it’s the version you’re invoking (by running
+java -version+). Now that Sun has open-sourced Java, this will
hopefully improve in the future, and we’ll get the Sun JRE and JDK by
default even in purist Linux distributions. Until that day, you may
need to do some of your own downloading.

[[installation-sect-maven-download]]
=== Downloading Maven

You can download Maven from the Apache Maven project website at
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html].

When downloading Maven, you can download the latest available version
the latest available version of Maven 3 in various branches. The
latest version of Maven 3 when this book was last updated was Maven
3.2.5. If you are not familiar with the Apache Software License, you
should familiarize yourself with the terms of the license before you
start using the product. More information on the Apache Software
License can be found in <<installation-sect-license>>.

TIP: We recommend to avoid Maven 2 as it is no longer maintained and use the latest version of Maven
3 available and listed as the 'current stable version'.

To download Maven , go to
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html]
and select the appropriate binary archive format for your platform. The
contents of the +zip+ or +tar.gz+ are the same.


[[installation-sect-maven-install]]
=== Installing Maven

There are wide differences between operating systems such as Mac OS X
and Microsoft Windows, and there are subtle differences between
different versions of Windows. Luckily, the process of installing
Maven on all of these operating systems is relatively painless and
straightforward. The following sections outline the recommended
best-practice for installing Maven on a variety of operating systems.

[[installation-sect-maven-osx]]
==== Installing Maven on Mac OSX

You can download a binary release of Maven from
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html].
Download the current release of Maven in a format that is convenient
for you to work with. Pick an appropriate place for it to live, and
expand the archive there. If you expanded the archive into the
directory '/opt/apache-maven-3.2.5', you may want to create a
symbolic link to make it easier to work with and to avoid the need to
change any environment configuration when you upgrade to a newer
version:

----
$ cd /opt
$ ln -s apache-maven-3.2.5 maven
$ export PATH=/opt/maven/bin:${PATH}
----

Once Maven is installed, you need to do a couple of things to make it
work correctly. You need to add its 'bin' directory in the
distribution (in this example, '/opt/maven/bin') to your command
path. 

You'll need to add +PATH+ to a script that will run
every time you login. To do this, add the following lines to
+.bash_login+ or +.profile+

----
export PATH=/opt/maven/bin:${PATH}
----

Once you've added these lines to your own environment, you will be
able to run Maven from the command line.

NOTE: These installation instructions assume that you are running
bash.

[[installation-sect-windows]]
==== Installing Maven on Microsoft Windows

Installing Maven on Windows is very similar to installing Maven on Mac
OSX, the main differences being the installation location and the
setting of an environment variable. This book assumes a Maven
installation directory of +c:\Program Files\apache-maven-3.2.5+, but
it won't make a difference if you install Maven in another directory
as long as you configure the proper environment variables. Once you've
unpacked Maven to the installation directory, you will need to set the +PATH+
environment variable. You can use the following commands:

----
C:\Users\tobrien >  set PATH=%PATH%;"c:\Program Files\apache-maven-3.2.5\bin"
----

Setting these environment variables on the command-line will allow you
to run Maven in your current session, but unless you add them to the
System environment variables through the control panel, you'll have to
execute these two lines every time you log into your system. You
should modify both of these variables through the Control Panel in
Microsoft Windows.

[[installation-sect-maven-linux]]
==== Installing Maven on Linux

To install Maven on a Linux machine follow the exact procedure
outlined in <<installation-sect-maven-osx>>.

[[installation-sect-bsd]]
==== Installing Maven on FreeBSD or OpenBSD

To install Maven on a FreeBSD or OpenBSD machine, follow the exact
procedure outlined in <<installation-sect-maven-osx>>.

[[installation-sect-test-install]]
=== Testing a Maven Installation

Once Maven is installed, you can check the version by running +mvn -v+
from the command-line. If Maven has been installed, you should see
something resembling the following output.

----
$ mvn -v
Apache Maven 3.2.5 (12a6b3acb947671f09b81f49094c53f426d8cea1; 2014-12-14T09:29:23-08:00)
Maven home: /opt/apache-maven-3.2.5
Java version: 1.7.0_71, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.7.0_71.jdk/Contents/Home/jre
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "mac os x", version: "10.8.5", arch: "x86_64", family: "mac"
----

If you see this output, you know that Maven is available and ready to
be used. If you do not see this output, and your operating system
cannot find the +mvn+ command, make sure that your +PATH+ environment
variable and +M2_HOME+ environment variable have been properly set.

[[installation-sect-details]]
=== Maven Installation Details

Maven's download measures in at roughly 1.5 MiB, it has attained such
a slim download size because the core of Maven has been designed to
retrieve plugins and dependencies from a remote repository
on-demand. When you start using Maven, it will start to download
plugins to a local repository described in
<<installation-sect-user>>. In case you are curious, let's take a
quick look at what is in Maven's installation directory.

----
$ ls /opt/maven -p1
LICENSE.txt
NOTICE.txt
README.txt
bin/
boot/
conf/
lib/
----

'LICENSE.txt' contains the software license for Apache Maven. This
license is described in some detail later in the section
<<installation-sect-license>>. 'NOTICE.txt' contains some notices and
attributions required by libraries that Maven depends on. 'README.txt'
contains some installation instructions. 'bin/' contains the 'mvn'
script that executes Maven. 'boot/' contains a JAR file
('classwords-1.1.jar') that is responsible for creating the Class
Loader in which Maven executes. 'conf/' contains a global
'settings.xml' that can be used to customize the behavior of your
Maven installation. If you need to customize Maven, it is customary to
override any settings in a 'settings.xml' file stored in
'~/.m2'. 'lib/' contains a single JAR file
('maven-core-3.0.3-uber.jar') that contains the core of Maven.

NOTE: Unless you are working in a shared Unix environment, you should
avoid customizing the 'settings.xml' in 'M2_HOME/conf'. Altering the
global 'settings.xml' file in the Maven installation itself is usually
unnecessary and it tends to complicate the upgrade procedure for Maven
as you'll have to remember to copy the customized 'settings.xml' from
the old Maven installation to the new installation. If you need to
customize 'settings.xml', you should be editing your own
'settings.xml' in '~/.m2/settings.xml'.

[[installation-sect-user]]
==== User-specific Configuration and Repository

Once you start using Maven extensively, you'll notice that Maven has
created some local user-specific configuration files and a local
repository in your home directory. In '~/.m2' there will be:

~/.m2/settings.xml::

  A file containing user-specific configuration for authentication,
  repositories, and other information to customize the behavior of
  Maven.

~/.m2/repository/::

  This directory contains your local Maven repository. When you
  download a dependency from a remote Maven repository, Maven stores a
  copy of the dependency in your local repository.

NOTE: In Unix (and OSX), your home directory will be referred to using
a tilde (i.e. '~/bin' refers to '/home/tobrien/bin'). In Windows, we
will also be using '~' to refer to your home directory. In Windows XP,
your home directory is 'C:\Documents and Settings\tobrien', and in
Windows Vista, your home directory is 'C:\Users\tobrien'. From this
point forward, you should translate paths such as '~/m2' to your
operating system's equivalent.

[[installation-sect-upgrade]]
==== Upgrading a Maven Installation

If you've installed Maven on a Mac OSX or Unix machine according to
the details in <<installation-sect-maven-osx>> and
<<installation-sect-maven-linux>>, it should be easy to upgrade to
newer versions of Maven when they become available. Simply install the
newer version of Maven ('/opt/maven-3.future') next to the
existing version of Maven ('/opt/maven-3.2.5'). Then switch the
symbolic link '/opt/maven' from '/opt/maven-3.2.5' to
'/opt/maven-3.future'. Since, you've already set your +M2_HOME+
variable to point to '/opt/maven', you won't need to change any
environment variables.

If you have installed Maven on a Windows machine, simply unpack Maven
to 'c:\Program Files\maven-3.future' and update your +M2_HOME+
variable.

NOTE: If you have any customizations to the global 'settings.xml' in
'M2_HOME/conf', you will need to copy this 'settings.xml' to the
'conf' directory of the new Maven installation.

[[installation-sect-uninstalling]]
=== Uninstalling Maven

Most of the installation instructions involve unpacking of the Maven
distribution archive in a directory and setting of various environment
variables. If you need to remove Maven from your computer, all you
need to do is delete your Maven installation directory and remove the
environment variables. You will also want to delete the '~/.m2'
directory as it contains your local repository.

[[installation-sect-getting-help]]
=== Getting Help with Maven

While this book aims to be a comprehensive reference, there are going
to be topics we will miss and special situations and tips which are
not covered. While the core of Maven is very simple, the real work in
Maven happens in the plugins, and there are too many plugins available
to cover them all in one book. You are going to encounter problems and
features which have not been covered in this book; in these cases, we
suggest searching for answers at the following locations:

maven.apache.org:::

  This will be the first place to look, the Maven web site contains a
  wealth of information and documentation. Every plugin has a few
  pages of documentation and there are a series of "quick start"
  documents which will be helpful in addition to the content of this
  book. While the Maven site contains a wealth of information, it can
  also be a frustrating, confusing, and overwhelming. There is a
  custom Google search box on the main Maven page that will search
  known Maven sites for information. This provides better results than
  a generic Google search.

Maven User Mailing List::

  The Maven User mailing list is the place for users to ask
  questions. Before you ask a question on the user mailing list, you
  will want to search for any previous discussion that might relate to
  your question. It is bad form to ask a question that has already
  been asked without first checking to see if an answer already exists
  in the archives. There are a number of useful mailing list archive
  browsers, we've found Nabble to the be the most useful. You can
  browse the User mailing list archives here:
  http://www.nabble.com/Maven---Users-f178.html[http://www.nabble.com/Maven---Users-f178.html].
  You can join the user mailing list by following the instructions
  available here
  http://maven.apache.org/mail-lists.html[http://maven.apache.org/mail-lists.html].

www.sonatype.com::

  Sonatype maintains an online copy of this book and other tutorials
  related to Apache Maven.

[[installation-sect-license]]
=== About the Apache Software License

Apache Maven is released under the Apache Software License, Version
2.0. If you want to read this license, you can read
'+++${M2_HOME}/LICENSE.txt+++' or read this license on the Open Source
Initiative's web site here:
http://www.opensource.org/licenses/apache2.0.php[http://www.opensource.org/licenses/apache2.0.php].

There's a good chance that, if you are reading this book, you are not
a lawyer. If you are wondering what the Apache License, Version 2.0
means, the Apache Software Foundation has assembled a very helpful
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) page about the license available
here:
http://www.apache.org/foundation/licence-FAQ.html[http://www.apache.org/foundation/licence-FAQ.html].
Here's is the answer to the question "I am not a lawyer. What does it
all mean?"

[This license] allows you to:

* freely download and use Apache software, in whole or in part, for
  personal, company internal, or commercial purposes;

* use Apache software in packages or distributions that you create.

It forbids you to:

* redistribute any piece of Apache-originated software without proper
  attribution;

* use any marks owned by The Apache Software Foundation in any way
  that might state or imply that the Foundation endorses your
  distribution;

* use any marks owned by The Apache Software Foundation in any way
  that might state or imply that you created the Apache software in
  question.

It requires you to:

* include a copy of the license in any redistribution you may make
  that includes Apache software;

* provide clear attribution to The Apache Software Foundation for any
  distributions that include Apache software.

It does not require you to:

* include the source of the Apache software itself, or of any
  modifications you may have made to it, in any redistribution you may
  assemble that includes it;

* submit changes that you make to the software back to the Apache
  Software Foundation (though such feedback is encouraged).

Commit message:

cleaned up install docs a bit more

chapter-installation.asciidoc, after:

[[installation]]
== Installing Maven

This chapter contains very detailed instructions for installing Maven
on a number of different platforms. Instead of assuming a level of
familiarity with installing software and setting environment
variables, we've opted to be as thorough as possible to minimize any
problems that might arise due to a partial installation. The only thing
this chapter assumes is that you've already installed a suitable Java
Development Kit (JDK). If you are just interested in installation, you
can move on to the rest of the book after reading through
<<installation-sect-maven-download>> and
<<installation-sect-maven-install>>. If you are interested in the
details of your Maven installation, this entire chapter will give you
an overview of what you've installed and the meaning of the Apache
Software License, Version 2.0.

[[installation-sect-java]]
=== Verify your Java Installation

The latest version of Maven currently requires the usage of Java 7 or
higher. While older Maven versions can run on older Java versions, this book
assumes that you are running at least Java 7. Go with the most recent
stable Java Development Kit (JDK) available for your operating system.

----
% java -version
java version "1.7.0_71"
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.7.0_71-b14)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 24.71-b01, mixed mode)
----

TIP: More details about Java version required for different Maven
versions can be found http://maven.apache.org/docs/history.html[on theMaven site].

Maven works with all certified Java^TM^ compatible development kits,
and a few non-certified implementations of Java. The examples in this
book were written and tested against the official Java Development Kit
releases downloaded from the Oracle web site. 

[[installation-sect-maven-download]]
=== Downloading Maven

You can download Maven from the Apache Maven project website at
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html].

When downloading Maven, you can download the latest available version
the latest available version of Maven 3 in various branches. The
latest version of Maven 3 when this book was last updated was Maven
3.3.3. If you are not familiar with the Apache Software License, you
should familiarize yourself with the terms of the license before you
start using the product. More information on the Apache Software
License can be found in <<installation-sect-license>>.

TIP: We recommend to avoid Maven 2 as it is no longer maintained and use the latest version of Maven
3 available and listed as the 'current stable version'.

To download Maven , go to
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html]
and select the appropriate binary archive format for your platform. The
contents of the +zip+ or +tar.gz+ are the same.


[[installation-sect-maven-install]]
=== Installing Maven

There are wide differences between operating systems such as Mac OS X
and Microsoft Windows, and there are subtle differences between
different versions of Windows. Luckily, the process of installing
Maven on all of these operating systems is relatively painless and
straightforward. The following sections outline the recommended
best-practice for installing Maven on a variety of operating systems.

[[installation-sect-maven-nix]]
==== Installing Maven on Linux, BSD or Mac OSX

You can download a binary release of Maven from
http://maven.apache.org/download.html[http://maven.apache.org/download.html].
Download the current release of Maven in a format that is convenient
for you to work with. Pick an appropriate place for it to live, and
expand the archive there. If you expanded the archive into the
directory '/opt/apache-maven-3.2.5', you may want to create a
symbolic link to make it easier to work with and to avoid the need to
change any environment configuration when you upgrade to a newer
version:

----
$ cd /opt
$ ln -s apache-maven-3.2.5 maven
$ export PATH=/opt/maven/bin:${PATH}
----

Once Maven is installed, you need to do a couple of things to make it
work correctly. You need to add its 'bin' directory in the
distribution (in this example, '/opt/maven/bin') to your command
path. 

You'll need to add +PATH+ to a script that will run
every time you login. To do this, add the following lines to
+.bash_login+ or +.profile+

----
export PATH=/opt/maven/bin:${PATH}
----

Once you've added these lines to your own environment, you will be
able to run Maven from the command line.

NOTE: These installation instructions assume that you are running
bash.

[[installation-sect-windows]]
==== Installing Maven on Microsoft Windows

Installing Maven on Windows is very similar to installing Maven on Mac
OSX, the main differences being the installation location and the
setting of an environment variable. This book assumes a Maven
installation directory of +c:\Program Files\apache-maven-3.2.5+, but
it won't make a difference if you install Maven in another directory
as long as you configure the proper environment variables. Once you've
unpacked Maven to the installation directory, you will need to set the +PATH+
environment variable. You can use the following commands:

----
C:\Users\tobrien >  set PATH=%PATH%;"c:\Program Files\apache-maven-3.2.5\bin"
----

Setting these environment variables on the command-line will allow you
to run Maven in your current session, but unless you add them to the
System environment variables through the control panel, you'll have to
execute these two lines every time you log into your system. You
should modify both of these variables through the Control Panel in
Microsoft Windows.

[[installation-sect-test-install]]
=== Testing a Maven Installation

Once Maven is installed, you can check the version by running +mvn -v+
from the command-line. If Maven has been installed, you should see
something resembling the following output.

----
$ mvn -v
Apache Maven 3.2.5 (12a6b3acb947671f09b81f49094c53f426d8cea1; 2014-12-14T09:29:23-08:00)
Maven home: /opt/apache-maven-3.2.5
Java version: 1.7.0_71, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.7.0_71.jdk/Contents/Home/jre
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "mac os x", version: "10.8.5", arch: "x86_64", family: "mac"
----

If you see this output, you know that Maven is available and ready to
be used. If you do not see this output, and your operating system
cannot find the +mvn+ command, make sure that your +PATH+ environment
variable and +M2_HOME+ environment variable have been properly set.

[[installation-sect-details]]
=== Maven Installation Details

Maven's download measures in at roughly 1.5 MiB, it has attained such
a slim download size because the core of Maven has been designed to
retrieve plugins and dependencies from a remote repository
on-demand. When you start using Maven, it will start to download
plugins to a local repository described in
<<installation-sect-user>>. In case you are curious, let's take a
quick look at what is in Maven's installation directory.

----
$ ls /opt/maven -p1
LICENSE.txt
NOTICE.txt
README.txt
bin/
boot/
conf/
lib/
----

'LICENSE.txt' contains the software license for Apache Maven. This
license is described in some detail later in the section
<<installation-sect-license>>. 'NOTICE.txt' contains some notices and
attributions required by libraries that Maven depends on. 'README.txt'
contains some installation instructions. 'bin/' contains the 'mvn'
script that executes Maven. 'boot/' contains a JAR file
('classwords-1.1.jar') that is responsible for creating the Class
Loader in which Maven executes. 'conf/' contains a global
'settings.xml' that can be used to customize the behavior of your
Maven installation. If you need to customize Maven, it is customary to
override any settings in a 'settings.xml' file stored in
'~/.m2'. 'lib/' contains a single JAR file
('maven-core-3.0.3-uber.jar') that contains the core of Maven.

NOTE: Unless you are working in a shared Unix environment, you should
avoid customizing the 'settings.xml' in 'M2_HOME/conf'. Altering the
global 'settings.xml' file in the Maven installation itself is usually
unnecessary and it tends to complicate the upgrade procedure for Maven
as you'll have to remember to copy the customized 'settings.xml' from
the old Maven installation to the new installation. If you need to
customize 'settings.xml', you should be editing your own
'settings.xml' in '~/.m2/settings.xml'.

[[installation-sect-user]]
==== User-specific Configuration and Repository

Once you start using Maven extensively, you'll notice that Maven has
created some local user-specific configuration files and a local
repository in your home directory. In '~/.m2' there will be:

~/.m2/settings.xml::

  A file containing user-specific configuration for authentication,
  repositories, and other information to customize the behavior of
  Maven.

~/.m2/repository/::

  This directory contains your local Maven repository. When you
  download a dependency from a remote Maven repository, Maven stores a
  copy of the dependency in your local repository.

NOTE: In Unix (and OSX), your home directory will be referred to using
a tilde (i.e. '~/bin' refers to '/home/tobrien/bin'). In Windows, we
will also be using '~' to refer to your home directory. In Windows XP,
your home directory is 'C:\Documents and Settings\tobrien', and in
Windows Vista, your home directory is 'C:\Users\tobrien'. From this
point forward, you should translate paths such as '~/m2' to your
operating system's equivalent.

[[installation-sect-upgrade]]
==== Upgrading a Maven Installation

If you've installed Maven on a Mac OSX or Unix machine according to
the details in <<installation-sect-maven-nix>>, it should be easy to upgrade to
newer versions of Maven when they become available. Simply install the
newer version of Maven ('/opt/maven-3.future') next to the
existing version of Maven ('/opt/maven-3.2.5'). Then switch the
symbolic link '/opt/maven' from '/opt/maven-3.2.5' to
'/opt/maven-3.future'. Since, you've already set your +M2_HOME+
variable to point to '/opt/maven', you won't need to change any
environment variables.

If you have installed Maven on a Windows machine, simply unpack Maven
to 'c:\Program Files\maven-3.future' and update your +M2_HOME+
variable.

NOTE: If you have any customizations to the global 'settings.xml' in
'M2_HOME/conf', you will need to copy this 'settings.xml' to the
'conf' directory of the new Maven installation.

[[installation-sect-uninstalling]]
=== Uninstalling Maven

Most of the installation instructions involve unpacking of the Maven
distribution archive in a directory and setting of various environment
variables. If you need to remove Maven from your computer, all you
need to do is delete your Maven installation directory and remove the
environment variables. You will also want to delete the '~/.m2'
directory as it contains your local repository.

[[installation-sect-getting-help]]
=== Getting Help with Maven

While this book aims to be a comprehensive reference, there are going
to be topics we will miss and special situations and tips which are
not covered. While the core of Maven is very simple, the real work in
Maven happens in the plugins, and there are too many plugins available
to cover them all in one book. You are going to encounter problems and
features which have not been covered in this book; in these cases, we
suggest searching for answers at the following locations:

maven.apache.org:::

  This will be the first place to look, the Maven web site contains a
  wealth of information and documentation. Every plugin has a few
  pages of documentation and there are a series of "quick start"
  documents which will be helpful in addition to the content of this
  book. While the Maven site contains a wealth of information, it can
  also be a frustrating, confusing, and overwhelming. There is a
  custom Google search box on the main Maven page that will search
  known Maven sites for information. This provides better results than
  a generic Google search.

Maven User Mailing List::

  The Maven User mailing list is the place for users to ask
  questions. Before you ask a question on the user mailing list, you
  will want to search for any previous discussion that might relate to
  your question. It is bad form to ask a question that has already
  been asked without first checking to see if an answer already exists
  in the archives. There are a number of useful mailing list archive
  browsers, we've found Nabble to the be the most useful. You can
  browse the User mailing list archives here:
  http://www.nabble.com/Maven---Users-f178.html[http://www.nabble.com/Maven---Users-f178.html].
  You can join the user mailing list by following the instructions
  available here
  http://maven.apache.org/mail-lists.html[http://maven.apache.org/mail-lists.html].

www.sonatype.com::

  Sonatype maintains an online copy of this book and other tutorials
  related to Apache Maven.

[[installation-sect-license]]
=== About the Apache Software License

Apache Maven is released under the Apache Software License, Version
2.0. If you want to read this license, you can read
'+++${M2_HOME}/LICENSE.txt+++' or read this license on the Open Source
Initiative's web site here:
http://www.opensource.org/licenses/apache2.0.php[http://www.opensource.org/licenses/apache2.0.php].

There's a good chance that, if you are reading this book, you are not
a lawyer. If you are wondering what the Apache License, Version 2.0
means, the Apache Software Foundation has assembled a very helpful
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) page about the license available
here:
http://www.apache.org/foundation/licence-FAQ.html[http://www.apache.org/foundation/licence-FAQ.html].
Here's is the answer to the question "I am not a lawyer. What does it
all mean?"

[This license] allows you to:

* freely download and use Apache software, in whole or in part, for
  personal, company internal, or commercial purposes;

* use Apache software in packages or distributions that you create.

It forbids you to:

* redistribute any piece of Apache-originated software without proper
  attribution;

* use any marks owned by The Apache Software Foundation in any way
  that might state or imply that the Foundation endorses your
  distribution;

* use any marks owned by The Apache Software Foundation in any way
  that might state or imply that you created the Apache software in
  question.

It requires you to:

* include a copy of the license in any redistribution you may make
  that includes Apache software;

* provide clear attribution to The Apache Software Foundation for any
  distributions that include Apache software.

It does not require you to:

* include the source of the Apache software itself, or of any
  modifications you may have made to it, in any redistribution you may
  assemble that includes it;

* submit changes that you make to the software back to the Apache
  Software Foundation (though such feedback is encouraged).
